# git 03

15-131

	$ git config --global alias.gud '!echo "you have become good."'
	$ git gud
	you have become good.

## Aliases

You can put something like this in your shell config file.

	alias ga="git add"
	alias gb="git branch"
	alias gc="git commit"
	alias gd="git diff"
	alias gh="git show"
	alias gi="git init"
	alias gk="git checkout"
	alias gl="git log-graph"
	alias gm="git merge"
	alias gp="git push"
	alias gpl="git pull"
	alias gr="git reset"
	alias grb="git rebase"
	alias gs="git status"

## Long status

	$ git status
	On branch master
	Your branch is ahead of 'origin/master' by 1 commit.
	  (use "git push" to publish your local commits)

	Changes to be committed:
	  (use "git reset HEAD <file>..." to unstage)

		modified:   package-lock.json

	Changes not staged for commit:
	  (use "git add <file>..." to update what will be committed)
	  (use "git checkout -- <file>..." to discard changes in working directory)

		modified:   readme.md

## Short status

	$ git config --global status.short true
	$ git config --global status.branch true
	$ git status
	## master...origin/master [ahead 1]
	M  package-lock.json
	 M readme.md

## Long log

	$ git log
	commit b14c16d4a113c8774fd9081b12d2fdf866b80bb6
	Author: Ariel Davis <ariel.z.davis@icloud.com>
	Date:   2017-12-02 01:48:06 -0500

	    add {long,short} {status,log}

	commit 13ed675a539520ae7f4a30c6313686ee1a224c0e
	Author: Ariel Davis <ariel.z.davis@icloud.com>
	Date:   2017-12-02 01:12:09 -0500

	    add 03

	commit 017986cdb39ff1f738eba3d672ec5b9f00502af1
	Author: Ariel Davis <ariel.z.davis@icloud.com>
	Date:   2017-11-02 14:32:14 -0400

	    change a hash

## Short log

	$ git config log.decorate true
	$ git config alias.log-graph 'log --all --graph --oneline'
	$ git log-graph
	* a2f89b5 (test) restructure layout
	* bc41322 move some files
	* 46bc238 change a var name
	* 6326544 update deps
	* 3169aa7 restructure logic
	| * b14c16d (HEAD -> master) add {long,short} {status,log}
	| * 13ed675 add 03
	| * 017986c (origin/master) change a hash
	| * 5516fd0 make an emphasis more obvious
	| * f262bd7 fix a typo
	|/
	* b2398f3 say less
	* 401c4fe do not talk about the lab

## add, reset, checkout with patches

All of `git add`, `git reset`, and `git checkout` have a `-p` option.

It lets you avoid having to operate on the whole file as one.

	$ git add -p
	diff --git a/src/03.md b/src/03.md
	index 5388e59..3e57a99 100644
	--- a/src/03.md
	+++ b/src/03.md
	@@ -2,9 +2,9 @@

	 15-131

	-	$ git config --global alias.gud '!echo "you have become good."'
	+	$ git config --global alias.gud '!echo "you have become great."'
		$ git gud
	-	you have become good.
	+	you have become great.

	 ## Aliases

	Stage this hunk [y,n,q,a,d,/,s,e,?]?

## Amending a commit

You can replace the currently checked-out commit (`HEAD`) with a new commit
with `git commit --amend`.

Careful: you should never change commits which are pushed.

## Hooks

Here's pretty much the one time you'll mess with the `.git` directory:

	$ cd .git
	$ mkdir -p hooks
	$ cd hooks

You can put various executable files in here which git will run before certain
events happen.

## Useful notation

`@` is a synonym for `HEAD`, the currently checked-out commit.

If you have a refspec, you can append `~` to it to mean "the commit before this
one."

	3455c89 = HEAD = @
	b14c16d = HEAD~ = @~
	13ed675 = HEAD~~ = @~~ = master
	017986c = HEAD~~~ = @~~~ = master~
	5516fd0 = HEAD~~~~ = @~~~~ = master~~

## `git show`

You can see what a commit did with `git show`.

	$ git show @~
	commit b14c16d4a113c8774fd9081b12d2fdf866b80bb6
	Author: Ariel Davis <ariel.z.davis@icloud.com>
	Date:   2017-12-02 01:48:06 -0500

	    add {long,short} {status,log}

	diff --git a/src/03.md b/src/03.md
	index 8638f78..716aaea 100644
	--- a/src/03.md
	+++ b/src/03.md
	@@ -1,3 +1,67 @@
	... the diff ...

## Fast-forward

Here's a simple example.

	        v master
	A - B - C - D - E - F - G
	                        ^ feature

Suppose you want to make `master` up to date with `feature`.

We could do

	$ git checkout master
	$ git merge feature

This would "fast-forward" `master` to be equal to `feature`.

	                        v master
	A - B - C - D - E - F - G
	                        ^ feature

## More complicated merge

Here's an more tricky example.

	                    v master
	A - B - C - H - I - J
	         \
	          D - E - F - G
	                      ^ feature

Suppose you want to make `master` up to date with `feature`.

## Merge commits

Again, you could go about this by doing

	$ git checkout master
	$ git merge feature

That would do the following:

	                        v master
	A - B - C - H - I - J - K
	         \             /
	          D - E - F - G
	                      ^ feature

Here, K is the merge commit. Now, this strategy is fine, but sometimes we don't
want a merge commit.

## Avoid merge commits

Suppose the branches were actually

	                    v master
	A - B - C - H - I - J
	         \
	          D - E - F - G
	                      ^ origin/master

In this case, it doesn't really make sense to have to create a merge commit
just to get your own `master` up-to-date with `origin/master`.

## The niceness of fast-forwarding

It would be great if the situation were like this:

            v master
	A - B - C
	         \
	          D - E - F - G
	                      ^ origin/master

Because then we can fast-forward.

	                        v master
	A - B - C - D - E - F - G
	                        ^ origin/master

So, no merge commit would be necessary.

But what about those H, I, J commits?

## Reapplying commits on a new base

We'd like to go from this

	                    v master
	A - B - C - H - I - J
	         \
	          D - E - F - G
	                      ^ origin/master

to this.

	A - B - C
	         \                          v master
	          D - E - F - G - H' - I' - J'
	                      ^ origin/master

You can reapply commits on top of a different base with `git rebase`.

	$ git checkout master
	$ git rebase origin/master

Careful: you should never change commits which are pushed.

## `git rebase`

In general, the modus operandi is

	$ git rebase <upstream>

- All changes made by commits in the current branch but that are not in
  `<upstream>` are saved to a temporary area.
- The current branch is reset to `<upstream>`.
- The commits that were previously saved into the temporary area are then
  reapplied to the current branch, one by one, in order.

## Pulling with rebase

The normal

	$ git pull origin master

is pretty much equivalent to

	$ git fetch origin master
	$ git merge origin/master

Rebase is really good when pulling. You can do

	$ git pull --rebase origin master

to pretty much mean

	$ git fetch origin master
	$ git rebase origin/master

You can also make the default `git pull` use rebase with

	$ git config --global pull.rebase preserve

## Soapbox: Making good commits

https://chris.beams.io/posts/git-commit/
